SCIENCE
(Code No. 086)
Classes: IX and X (2024-25)
The subject of Science plays an important role in developing well-defined abilities in cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains in children. It augments the spirit of enquiry, creativity, objectivity and aesthetic sensibility. Upper primary stage demands that a number of opportunities should be provided to the students to engage them with the processes of Science like observing, recording observations, drawing, tabulation, plotting graphs, etc., whereas the secondary stage also expects abstraction and quantitative reasoning to occupy a more central place in the teaching and learning of Science. Thus, the idea of atoms and molecules being the building blocks of matter makes its appearance, as does Newton’s law of gravitation. The present syllabus has been designed around seven broad themes viz. Food; Materials; The World of The Living; How Things Work; Moving Things, People and Ideas; Natural Phenomenon and Natural Resources. Special care has been taken to avoid temptation of adding too many concepts than can be comfortably learnt in the given time frame. No attempt has been made to be comprehensive. At this stage, while Science is still a common subject, the disciplines of Physics, Chemistry and Biology begin to emerge. The students should be exposed to experiences based on hands on activities as well as modes of reasoning that are typical of the subject.  

General Instructions: 

1. There will be an Annual Examination based on the entire syllabus. 
2. The Annual Examination will be of 80 marks and 20 marks weightage shall be for Internal Assessment. 
3. For Internal Assessment: 
a. There will be Periodic Assessment that would include: 
 For 5 marks- Three periodic tests conducted by the school. Average of the best two tests to be taken that will have a weightage of 05 marks towards the final result. 
 For 5 marks- Diverse methods of assessment as per the need of the class dynamics and curriculum transaction. These may include - short tests, oral test, quiz, concept maps, projects, posters, presentations and enquiry based scientific investigations etc. and use rubrics for arguing them objectively. This will also have a weightage of 05 marks towards the final result. 
b. Practical / Laboratory work should be done throughout the year and the student should maintain record of the same. Practical Assessment should be continuous. There will be weightage of 5 marks towards the final result. All practicals listed in the syllabus must be completed. 
c. Portfolio to be prepared by the student- This would include classwork and other sample of student work and will carry a weightage of 5 marks towards the final results.

COURSE STRUCTURE 
CLASS IX 
(Annual Examination) Marks: 80 
Unit No. Unit Marks I Matter - Its Nature and Behaviour 25 II Organization in the Living World 22 III Motion, Force and Work 27 IV Food; Food Production 06 Total 80 Internal assessment 20 Grand Total 100 

Theme: Materials 

Unit I: Matter-Nature and Behaviour Definition of matter; solid, liquid and gas; characteristics - shape, volume, density; change of state- melting (absorption of heat), freezing, evaporation (cooling by evaporation), condensation, sublimation. Nature of matter: Elements, compounds and mixtures. Heterogeneous and homogenous mixtures, colloids and suspensions. Physical and chemical changes (excluding separating the components of a mixture). Particle nature and their basic units: Atoms and molecules, Law of Chemical Combination, Chemical formula of common compounds, Atomic and molecular masses. Structure of atoms: Electrons, protons and neutrons, Valency, Atomic Number and Mass Number, Isotopes and Isobars. 

Theme: The World of the Living 

Unit II: Organization in the Living World Cell - Basic Unit of life : Cell as a basic unit of life; prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, multicellular organisms; cell membrane and cell wall, cell organelles and cell inclusions; chloroplast, mitochondria, vacuoles, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus; nucleus, chromosomes - basic structure, number.Tissues, Organs, Organ System, Organism: Structure and functions of animal and plant tissues (only four types of tissues in animals; Meristematic and Permanent tissues in plants). 

Theme: Moving Things, People and Ideas 

Unit III: Motion, Force and Work Motion: Distance and displacement, velocity; uniform and non-uniform motion along a straight line; acceleration, distance-time and velocity-time graphs for uniform motion and uniformly accelerated motion, elementary idea of uniform circular motion. Force and Newton’s laws : Force and Motion, Newton’s Laws of Motion, Action and Reaction forces, Inertia of a body, Inertia and mass, Momentum, Force and Acceleration. Gravitation: Gravitation; Universal Law of Gravitation, Force of Gravitation of the earth (gravity), Acceleration due to Gravity; Mass and Weight; Free fall. Floatation: Thrust and Pressure. Archimedes’ Principle; Buoyancy. Work, Energy and Power: Work done by a Force, Energy, power; Kinetic and Potential energy; Law of conservation of energy (excluding commercial unit of Energy). Sound: Nature of sound and its propagation in various media, speed of sound, range of hearing in humans; ultrasound; reflection of sound; echo. 

Theme: Food

 Unit IV: Food Production Plant and animal breeding and selection for quality improvement and management; Use of fertilizers and manures; Protection from pests and diseases; Organic farming. Note for the Teachers: 1. The chapter Natural Resources (NCERT Chapter 14) will not be assessed in the year-end examination. However, learners may be assigned to read this chapter and encouraged to prepare a brief write up on any concept of this chapter in their Portfolio. This may be for Internal Assessment and credit may be given for Periodic Assessment/Portfolio. 2. The NCERT text books present information in boxes across the book. These help students to get conceptual clarity. However, the information in these boxes would not be assessed in the year-end examination.

PRACTICALS 

Practicals should be conducted alongside the concepts taught in theory classes. (LIST OF EXPERIMENTS) 1. Preparation of: Unit-I a) a true solution of common salt, sugar and alum b) a suspension of soil, chalk powder and fine sand in water c) a colloidal solution of starch in water and egg albumin/milk in water and distinguish between these on the basis of  transparency  filtration criterion  stability 2. Preparation of Unit-I a) A mixture b) A compound using iron filings and sulphur powder and distinguishing between these on the basis of: (i) appearance, i.e., homogeneity and heterogeneity (ii) behaviour towards a magnet (iii) behaviour towards carbon disulphide as a solvent (iv) effect of heat 3. 4. Perform the following reactions and classify them as physical or chemical changes: a) b) c) d) e) Iron with copper sulphate solution in water Burning of magnesium ribbon in air Zinc with dilute sulphuric acid Heating of copper sulphate crystals Sodium sulphate with barium chloride in the form of their solutions in water Unit-I Preparation of stained temporary mounts of (a) onion peel, (b) human cheek cells & to record observations and draw their labeled diagrams. Unit-II 5. Identification of Parenchyma, Collenchyma and Sclerenchyma tissues in plants, striped, smooth and cardiac muscle fibers and nerve cells in animals, from prepared slides. Draw their labeled diagrams. Unit-II 6. Determination of the melting point of ice and the boiling point of water. Unit-I7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Verification of the Laws of reflection of sound. Unit-III Determination of the density of solid (denser than water) by using a spring balance and a measuring cylinder. Unit-III Establishing the relation between the loss in weight of a solid when fully immersed in Unit-III a) Tap water b) Strongly salty water with the weight of water displaced by it by taking at least two different solids. Determination of the speed of a pulse propagated through a stretched string/slinky (helical spring). Unit-III Verification of the law of conservation of mass in a chemical reaction. Unit-III 

COURSE STRUCTURE 

CLASS X 

(Annual Examination) 

Marks: 80 Unit No. Unit Marks I Chemical Substances-Nature and Behaviour 25 II World of Living 25 III Natural Phenomena 12 IV Effects of Current 13 V Natural Resources 05 Total 80 Internal assessment 20 Grand Total 100 

Theme: Materials 

Unit I: Chemical Substances - Nature and Behaviour Chemical reactions: Chemical equation, Balanced chemical equation, implications of a balanced chemical equation, types of chemical reactions: combination, decomposition, displacement, double displacement, precipitation, endothermic exothermic reactions, oxidation and reduction.Acids, bases and salts: Their definitions in terms of furnishing of H+ and OH– ions, General properties, examples and uses, neutralization, concept of pH scale (Definition relating to logarithm not required), importance of pH in everyday life; preparation and uses of Sodium Hydroxide, Bleaching powder, Baking soda, Washing soda and Plaster of Paris. Metals and nonmetals: Properties of metals and non-metals; Reactivity series; Formation and properties of ionic compounds; Basic metallurgical processes; Corrosion and its prevention. Carbon compounds: Covalent bonding in carbon compounds. Versatile nature of carbon. Homologous series. Nomenclature of carbon compounds containing functional groups (halogens, alcohol, ketones, aldehydes, alkanes and alkynes), difference between saturated hydro carbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons. Chemical properties of carbon compounds (combustion, oxidation, addition and substitution reaction). Ethanol and Ethanoic acid (only properties and uses), soaps and detergents. 

Theme: The World of the Living 

Unit II: World of Living Life processes: ‘Living Being’. Basic concept of nutrition, respiration, transport and excretion in plants and animals. Control and co-ordination in animals and plants: Tropic movements in plants; Introduction of plant hormones; Control and co-ordination in animals: Nervous system; Voluntary, involuntary and reflex action; Chemical co-ordination: animal hormones. Reproduction: Reproduction in animals and plants (asexual and sexual) reproductive health - need and methods of family planning. Safe sex vs HIV/AIDS. Child bearing and women’s health. Heredity and Evolution: Heredity; Mendel’s contribution- Laws for inheritance of traits: Sex determination: brief introduction: (topics excluded - evolution; evolution and classification and evolution should not be equated with progress). 

Theme: Natural Phenomena 

Unit III: Natural Phenomena Reflection of light by curved surfaces; Images formed by spherical mirrors, centre of curvature, principal axis, principal focus, focal length, mirror formula (Derivation not required),magnification. Refraction; Laws of refraction, refractive index. Refraction of light by spherical lens; Image formed by spherical lenses; Lens formula (Derivation not required); Magnification. Power of a lens. Functioning of a lens in human eye, defects of vision and their corrections, applications of spherical mirrors and lenses.Refraction of light through a prism, dispersion of light, scattering of light, applications in dailylife (excluding colour of the sun at sunrise and sunset). 

Theme: How Things Work

 Unit IV: Effects of Current Electric current, potential difference and electric current. Ohm’s law; Resistance, Resistivity, Factors on which the resistance of a conductor depends. Series combination of resistors, parallel combination of resistors and its applications in daily life. Heating effect of electric current and its applications in daily life. Electric power, Interrelation between P, V, I and R. Magnetic effects of current: Magnetic field, field lines, field due to a current carrying conductor, field due to current carrying coil or solenoid; Force on current carrying conductor, Fleming’s Left Hand Rule, Direct current. Alternating current: frequency of AC. Advantage of AC over DC. Domestic electric circuits. 

Theme: Natural Resources 

Unit V: Natural Resources Our environment: Eco-system, Environmental problems, Ozone depletion, waste production and their solutions. Biodegradable and non-biodegradable substances. 

Note for the Teachers: 

1. The chapter Management of Natural Resources (NCERT Chapter 16) will not be assessed in the year-end examination. However, learners may be assigned to read this chapter and encouraged to prepare a brief write up to any concept of this chapter in their Portfolio. This may be for Internal Assessment and credit may be given Periodic Assessment/Portfolio). 2. The NCERT text books present information in boxes across the book. These help students to get conceptual clarity. However, the information in these boxes would not be assessed in the year-end examination. 

PRACTICALS 

Practical should be conducted alongside the concepts taught in theory classes. LIST OF EXPERIMENTS 1. A. Finding the pH of the following samples by using pH paper/universal indicator: (i) Dilute Hydrochloric Acid (ii) Dilute NaOH solution (iii) Dilute Ethanoic Acid solution (iv) Lemon juice (v) Water (vi) Dilute Hydrogen Carbonate solution Unit-IB. Studying the properties of acids and bases (HCl & NaOH) on the basis of their reaction with: 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Unit-I a) Litmus solution (Blue/Red) b) Zinc metal c) Solid sodium carbonate Performing and observing the following reactions and classifying them into: A. Combination reaction Unit-I B. Decomposition reaction C. Displacement reaction D. Double displacement reaction (i) Action of water on quicklime (ii) Action of heat on ferrous sulphate crystals (iii) Iron nails kept in copper sulphate solution (iv) Reaction between sodium sulphate and barium chloride solutions Observing the action of Zn, Fe, Cu and Al metals on the following salt solutions: Unit-I i) ZnSO4(aq) ii) FeSO4(aq) iii) CuSO4(aq) iv) Al2 (SO4)3(aq) Arranging Zn, Fe, Cu and Al (metals) in the decreasing order of reactivity based on the above result. Studying the dependence of potential difference (V) across a resistor on the current (I) passing through it and determine its resistance. Also plotting a graph between V and I. Unit-IV Determination of the equivalent resistance of two resistors when connected in series and parallel. Unit-IV Preparing a temporary mount of a leaf peel to show stomata. Unit- II Experimentally show that carbon dioxide is given out during respiration. Unit-II Study of the following properties of acetic acid (ethanoic acid): Unit- I i) Odour ii) solubility in water iii) effect on litmus iv) reaction with Sodium Hydrogen Carbonate 9. Study of the comparative cleaning capacity of a sample of soap in soft and hard water. 10. Determination of the focal length of: Unit- I Unit-III11. 12. 13. 14. i) Concave mirror ii) Convex lens by obtaining the image of a distant object. Tracing the path of a ray of light passing through a rectangular glass slab for different angles of incidence. Measure the angle of incidence, angle of refraction, angle of emergence and interpret the result. Unit - III Studying (a) binary fission in Amoeba, and (b) budding in yeast and Hydra with the help of prepared slides. Unit-II Tracing the path of the rays of light through a glass prism. Unit-III Identification of the different parts of an embryo of a dicot seed (Pea, gram or red kidney bean). Unit-II 

PRESCRIBED BOOKS: 

 Science-Textbook for class IX-NCERT Publication  Science-Text book for class X- NCERT Publication  Assessment of Practical Skills in Science-Class IX - CBSE Publication  Assessment of Practical Skills in Science- Class X- CBSE Publication  Laboratory Manual-Science-Class IX, NCERT Publication  Laboratory Manual-Science-Class X, NCERT Publication  Exemplar Problems Class IX – NCERT Publication  Exemplar Problems Class X – NCERT Publication

Theory (80 marks) Question Paper Design 

(Class X) 

Subject: Science 

Competencies Total Demonstrate Knowledge and Understanding 46 % Application of Knowledge/Concepts 22 % Formulate, Analyze, Evaluate and Create 32 % 100% 

Note:  Typology of Questions: VSA including objective type questions, Assertion – Reasoning type questions; SA; LA; Source-based/ Case-based/ Passage-based/ Integrated assessment questions.  An internal choice of approximately 33% would be provided. 

Internal Assessment (20 Marks) 

 Periodic Assessment - 05 marks + 05 marks  Subject Enrichment (Practical Work) - 05 marks  Portfolio - 05 marks 

Suggestive verbs for various competencies 

 Demonstrate Knowledge and Understanding o State, name, list, identify, define, suggest, describe, outline, summarize, etc.  Application of Knowledge/Concepts o Calculate, illustrate, show, adapt, explain, distinguish, etc.  Formulate, Analyze, Evaluate and Create o Interpret, analyze, compare, contrast, examine, evaluate, discuss, construct, etc.